# **About ArcView® GIS Version 3.x** #

ArcView is a useful software or desktop GIS and mapping.  It is a product of Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. (ESRI).  ArcView GIS is a powerful software that provides for visualizing, querying, exploring, and analyzing data geographically.  ArcView is a powerful GIS tool that can display information (which resides locally or over a distributed network), read spatial and tabular information from a variety of data formats, access external databases, produce thematic maps (use colors and symbols to represent features as well to represent features based on their attributes), perform spatial queries, connect spatial information to database attributes, provide several analytical tools, and allows for a high degree of customization using Avenue.  For further details, please refer to the ESRI website at http://www.esri.com.

Several versions of ArcView 3.x have been released to date.  This tutorial is very basic in nature and addresses general features of versions 3.0, 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3.  Although no distinction will be made in this tutorial amongst the four versions of ArcView, it is important to emphasize the added options and features that were included in each subsequent release of ArcView 3.x.  The following are some of the distinctive enhancements of the various releases of ArcView GIS over ArcView 3.0 (Sourse: ESRI White Paper):

"ArcView 3.1 introduced a wizard-based approach to accomplish a variety of more sophisticated tasks such as advanced map production and advanced geoprocessing. Task wizards, along with other updates focusing on enhancing usability, leverage the power of ArcView to help you more quickly and easily accomplish your geographic information system (GIS) objectives. ArcView 3.1 also introduced several new included extensions, specifically designed to supplement your GIS requirements. In particular, ArcView features a report writer extension that enables you to easily generate professional reports, including embedded maps and charts, that help you more successfully communicate the results of your GIS analysis.
ArcView 3.2 provided both strategic updates to existing capabilities as well as new tools to facilitate your GIS operations. Specifically, ArcView 3.2 included an updated report writer and significant database access improvements. ArcView 3.2 also introduced a new shapefile projection utility, providing support for an extensive range of data projections and datum transformations, as well as support for several new data formats.
ArcView 3.3 provides key updates to many of the tools that are part of ArcView.  ArcView 3.3 includes updates to many extensions including CAD Reader, ERDAS IMAGINE® Image Reader, and the National Imagery Transmission Format (NITF) Data Reader. Also, the Projection Utility has been enhanced for greater performance. The Report Writer has been updated to include Crystal Reports™ 8.5 by Crystal Decisions. Database Access 2.1c is also included to support the latest ArcSDE™ database and provide direct connections to ArcSDE data. ESRI Data & Maps has also expanded to eight CDs full of new and updated data."
Several extensions are available for use with ArcView.  Many of these are commercial extensions developed by ESRI and others.